for 20+ years the singapore malay/muslim community is successful in countering extremist ideology. measures include licensing/regulation for asatizahs (teachers of islam) + sermons/material to clarify misconceptions + religious counselling for radicalised muslim singaporeans + looking out for those at risk. that is why singapore not yet kena terrorist attack compared to the communist threat in 1960s.

i think this success made singaporeans complacent about extremist ideology which can also come from other groups:

many christians in singapore kena influenced by trump like ideology (like the indian boy who plan to attack mosques).

many traditional chinese in singapore kena brainwashed by china propaganda.

some liberal singaporeans (usually with more economic privilege) are becoming more radical and polarising.

some malay/muslim singaporeans are getting tired of community efforts to counter extremist ideology. more are feeling alienated from wider singapore society.

there are many possible factors for the slight increase in extremist ideology in singapore:

impact of pandemic on singapore society + social cohesion. for example, increase in racism against chinese in 2020 then indians during delta. many elderly forced to rely on digital media despite limited technical skills + limited media literacy (easily misled by fake news).

impact of pandemic + inflation (also housing crisis) pushed many poor families to breaking point. to see rich westernised singaporeans enjoying life + elitism rubs salt into the wounds.

extremist recruiters/influencers become smarter to use same psychology tricks as scammers + take advantage of existing fault lines in our society (like language barriers) + target most vulnerable.

extremism from any group adds to mistrust/insecurity in other groups which can add to extremism in other groups leading to a vicious cycle/multiplier effect (not sure of correct term).

only a small percentage of singaporeans believe in extremist ideology and among them only a small percentage will resort to violence. but if the above trends multiply the small percentage by 3 (example number) that can be the difference leading to hate crimes/first successful terrorist attack.

true stories of two people i know who are affected by extremist ideology (details vague to protect identities):

a close friend from secondary school + his family are traditional chinese but when they invite me to their place they serve halal food + his parents (chinese educated with limited english) talk to me in malay. during covid his parents start to use chinese social media a lot for news/music/movies + buy cheap stuff. his mother passed away due to covid. while he + family are greiving (so burning more but still try to be responsible) kena conflict with another chinese family over their burning. then got financial/legal stuff to settle (like insurance/will) but the father don't know how (all in english) and tried to get help on chinese social media. the father read a lot of china propaganda then kena brainwashed. he keeps telling his children he would support china to attack singapore to kill all the jiak kantang singaporeans who want to destroy chinese culture + keep traditional chinese singaporeans in poverty. even asked my friend to shoot jiak kantang singaporeans during ns. friend/siblings don't want to report him because he was a great father for many years + they scared they kena starved if he kena arrested.

a cousin (we grew up together) with special needs who is intelligent but naive + quiet. pandemic dashed his family's (and mine) hopes of escaping poverty (his therapy also kena disrupted). he recently completed mainstream education (kena bullied a lot) but struggling to find job due to poor economy + racial discrimination + special needs challenges. he spends most of the time on the computer. few months ago he shared in family whatsapp group screenshots of lgbt supporters here insulting people who oppose lgbt rights as retarded + comparing them to isis. when i found out he surfs a lot of extremist material i told his mother but she said better not report. she thinks with his condition he is not able to carry out any attack + police will not be able to handle him properly. she will try to find an asatizah familiar with special needs to talk to him but is not high priority compared to day to day economic survival.

hope we can take the threat seriously + have a rationale discussion about how to counter extremist ideology.dive, singaporeans, ideology, media, attack, singapore, lot, extremist, chinese, family, kenamany traditional chinese in singapore kena brainwashed by china propaganda.
some malay/muslim singaporeans are getting tired of community efforts to counter extremist ideology.
there are many possible factors for the slight increase in extremist ideology in singapore:impact of pandemic on singapore society + social cohesion.
only a small percentage of singaporeans believe in extremist ideology and among them only a small percentage will resort to violence.
hope we can take the threat seriously + have a rationale discussion about how to counter extremist ideology.countering terrorism and violent extremism

on 11 sep 2001, the world watched in horror as operatives from the terrorist group, al-qaeda (aq), hijacked and crashed two commercial aircrafts into the iconic world trade centre towers in new york city. a third aircraft was flown into the us pentagon. the catastrophic events of 9/11 marked the beginning of a new wave of terrorism, from which singapore was not spared.

the first specific lead that isd received which led to the disruption of the singapore network of the aq-affiliated regional terror group, jemaah islamiyah (ji), came from a vigilant member of the public. a singaporean source had informed isd that mohammad aslam bin yar ali khan (aslam) had aq links. isd then mounted surveillance on a group of people associated with him and investigated them. in december 2001, isd brought forward operations against aslam’s associates after the media published a report about aslam following his arrest by the northern alliance in afghanistan. as part of the operations mounted against the singapore ji network, 15 persons were arrested by isd between 9 dec and 24 dec 2001, and another 21 persons were arrested in august 2002.

uncovering the jemaah islamiyah network the singapore ji was part of ji's terror network that spanned several countries in southeast asia and included australia. beginning in december 2001, isd arrested dozens of members of the jemaah islamiyah (ji) terrorist cell in singapore, which disrupted their local attack. ji had plotted with aq operatives to carry out several operations targeting western interests, including the us embassy, and key installations in singapore. isd's timely intervention prevented the singapore ji from executing their planned attacks. had the attack plans gone ahead, there would have been grave consequences for singapore and singaporeans. a singaporean ji member had briefed the aq leadership about some of ji's attack plots. a reconnaissance videotape and notes and sketches containing information on yishun mrt station and the shuttle bus service which ferried us military personnel to the station were found in the home of a high-level aq operative in afghanistan. on 14 december 2001, five days after the first ji arrests, the americans briefed isd about the video when isd briefed them about the ji arrests. handwritten notes on bomb-making were seized during the arrest of a singapore ji member. learn more about the ji arrests: "white paper - the jemaah islamiyah arrests and the threat of terrorism" and "20th anniversary of isd’s operations against jemaah islamiyah in singapore"

decoding the jemaah islamiyah enigma the singapore ji institutionalised sophisticated security practices and counter-surveillance tradecraft to evade detection by the authorities. a strict culture of secrecy was ingrained among ji members at the point of recruitment. it was common for members to use multiple aliases, and to frequently change them. they regularly communicated using code-words and code-numbers, including to arrange meetings. ji members used the codes in conjunction with a special recall code system, bmtdk, to alert members of upcoming meetings. it stands for b - “bila” (when), m - “masa” (time), t - “tempat” (place), d - “daripada” (from whom), k - “kepada” (to whom). for example, if the code number of ji member “a” is 41, “b” is 42 and “c” is 43, then 29-20-41-42-43 means that “c” has been activated by “b” to meet at “a”’s place at 2000hrs on the 29th (day of the month). even private meetings held at the homes of ji members were subjected to stringent security protocols. for example, members would alight at a bus-stop near their intended destination and walk the rest of the way. instead of taking the lift to the floor of the member’s house where the meeting was to be held, they would alight several floors either up or down and make the rest of their journey on foot. members staggered their arrival and dispersal, and brought their footwear inside the house so that there were no indications of a large gathering. the security measures were documented in a 12-page document entitled “security of an organisation” uncovered from forensic investigations of a ji member’s hard disk. operational materials and resources, including the reconnaissance videos of selected targets, were hidden in plain sight in the ji members’ homes and offices. isd found two video compact disks (vcds) innocuously labelled “visiting singapore sightseeing” and “mp3 rock n roll” in the ji members’ possession. these contained the reconnaissance footages of the intended attack targets, including various embassies and high commissions, and the naval vessels at sembawang wharf and changi naval base respectively. the ji’s reconnaissance videos of various targets in singapore were found in vcds innocuously labelled “visiting singapore sightseeing” and “mp3 rock n roll”. ji members also came up with simple methods to conceal important information in their computers. some created seemingly empty documents on their devices by obscuring contents using font size-one and white fonts. ji members were also known to have deliberately embedded important information in excel files. to crack the ji’s security tactics, isd officers had to check through a large number of items seized from the ji members meticulously. given the time sensitivity of the operations, officers often had to rely on their security instincts and resourcefulness to decisively ferret out critical operational leads. for instance, in the midst of the ji operations, an isd officer, “choong”, was handed a diskette found in the home of a ji member. it contained an excel file that appeared to be empty. however, choong noticed that the file size was very large, and thought that this was strange and suspicious. back then, excel had a maximum capacity of approximately 65,000 rows, or about 38,000 a4 pages – a herculean task to comb through manually. exercising some creativity and taping on his knowledge of excel, choong was able to devise a simple yet effective solution to quickly uncover the hidden data. buried in the 10,000th page of the excel file were the financial records of the ji. choong’s discovery was invaluable in helping isd to piece together details of the group and its members.

the terrorism threat is an evolving one. the mid-2000s saw the rise of self or home grown radicalisation where individuals who were not part of any organised terrorist groups became radicalised by the radical propaganda put out by groups like al qaeda or radical ideologues like anwar al-awlaki (deceased). in 2007, isd detected the first case of a self-radicalised singaporean who wanted to carry out armed violence overseas. as the internet and the use of social media become ubiquitous, online terrorist propaganda became one of the key means through which individuals become radicalised.

in the mid-2010s, we saw the rise of the islamic state in iraq and syria (isis) amidst the syrian conflict. the game-changer during this period was the social media. isis’s savvy use of social media and ability to produce propaganda videos of high production value led to a new wave of radicalisation cases involving both singaporeans and foreigners based here. those radicalised were also getting younger, and for the first time, women were being dealt with under the isa because of their terrorism involvement. several of these radicalised individuals had harboured intentions to travel to syria to fight alongside isis or other terrorist groups operating in the conflict zone. a few were even willing to conduct attacks in singapore or against singapore interests overseas. isd’s pre-emptive security operations thwarted their violent plans.

did you know? the internal security act (isa) allows the government to act pre-emptively to protect singapore from threats to our internal security, such as terrorism, foreign subversion, sabotage, espionage, politically-motivated violence by other countries and acts of violence or hatred against persons on the basis of race or religion. to find out more about the isa, download the isa booklet.

violent extremism is not restricted to any one race or religion. beyond radical islamist terrorism, the global rise of other forms of violent extremist movements including far-right extremism, has added to the terrorism threat singapore faces.

in december 2020, isd detained the first self-radicalised individual who was influenced by far-right extremist ideology. the 16-year-old singaporean youth was inspired by the march 2019 christchurch mosque shooter, brenton tarrant, and wanted to emulate his attack.

plot to attack muslims on the anniversary of the christchurch attacks the youth was found to have made detailed plans and preparation to conduct attacks using a machete against muslims at two mosques in singapore. he intended to conduct the attacks on 15 march 2021, the second anniversary of the christchurch attacks. learn more about his radicalisation and this attack plot. an image of a vest that the 16-year-old youth intended to adorn with right-wing extremist symbols and wear during his intended attacks, and an online listing of a machete that he wanted to purchase for the attacks.

shortly after, the serious threat of lone-actor attacks was further underscored by the case of the 20-year-old singaporean youth who was detained under the isa in march 2021. aggrieved by the israel-palestine conflict, he had made plans and preparations to conduct a knife attack against members of the jewish community at the maghain aboth synagogue in singapore. he also wanted to travel to gaza in the palestinian territories to join the military wing of hamas.

plot to attack members of the jewish community in singapore the 20-year-old singaporean was the first self-radicalised individual who was aggrieved by the israel-palestine conflict to the extent that he wanted to engage in armed violence.



learn more about his radicalisation and this attack plot. replica of an ak-47 rifle made by the individual to practice rifle-handling techniques a knife which the individual intended to use during his attack at maghain aboth synagogue was sized by isd.

these cases illustrate that external developments and foreign grievances have significant repercussions on singapore’s security landscape, and could motivate at-risk individuals in our society to engage in violence.

the developments in afghanistan in 2021 could also have an impact on singapore’s domestic security. the state of civil conflict and taliban’s ascension to power may allow transnational terrorist groups like aq and isis to re-establish safe havens for training and attack planning. militant groups may also leverage on ideological narratives to attract recruits, including radicalised individuals from singapore, to afghanistan as a theatre for jihad. read about isd’s assessment on this issue in media.

the straits times, 16 august 2021, how will the taleban’s comeback in afghanistan affect singapore and the region?

lianhe zaobao, 17 august 2021, 我国内安居与反恐专家： 塔利班回归或感召东南亚会叫激进分子

today, 17 august 2021, explainer: the reasons for the taliban’s swift takeover of afghanistan and possible implications for southeast asia

isd is committed to taking firm action against any individual in singapore who supports, promotes, undertakes or makes preparations to undertake armed violence. this is regardless of how the individual rationalises such violence, or where the intended violence is to take place. anyone who knows or suspects that a person has intentions to travel to afghanistan or other conflict zones should promptly contact the isd counter-terrorism hotline 1800-2626-473 or make a report via the sgsecure app.

historically, terrorism is not a new threat to singapore. singapore has had prior brushes with international terrorism, namely the laju incident in 1974 and the hijacking of flight sq117 in 1991. the key difference between these earlier incidents and the terrorism threat we face today is the fact that the ji network in singapore, and the self-radicalised individuals dealt with in more recent years, were our fellow singaporeans who were willing to resort to violence to advance extremist beliefs. the fight against the contemporary terrorism threat requires not only a kinetic response, but a battle of hearts and minds to ensure that extremist beliefs do not take root in our society.

stay in the know on isd's counter-terrorism cases.



contending with communalism

singapore’s racial and religious diversity is a strength worth celebrating, but it also carries inherent vulnerabilities. the relative racial and religious harmony, or communal harmony, that singaporeans enjoy today belies a past punctuated by racial and religious riots.

racial riots in the 1960s in 1964, when singapore was part of malaysia, deadly riots broke out between chinese and malays amidst an atmosphere of heightened communal tensions. the violence in singapore in july and september 1964 claimed 36 lives and injured over 500 people. together with the police, isd, then known as the singapore special branch, worked tirelessly to contain the volatile situation. in may 1969, communal riots in malaysia spilled over to singapore in the wake of the malaysian general election. in the week of rioting that ensued in singapore, four people were killed and 80 others injured. the police and the singapore armed forces, acting on intelligence from isd, eventually brought the situation under control. federal reserve unit policemen cordoning off the streets along kallang and geylang roads during the 1964 racial riots.

singapore has not experienced large-scale communal unrest since the 1960s but this does not mean that the threat of communalism or racial and religious extremism has ebbed. race and religion remain the most visceral and dangerous fault lines in our society.

isd’s role in safeguarding racial and religious harmony in singapore primarily takes place behind the scenes. we intervene, and work with community stakeholders, where necessary to prevent individuals and groups from stoking communal unrest, sowing inter-communal discord and undermining the social cohesion that singapore has painstakingly nurtured over the years.

visit the harmony in diversity gallery to find out more.

guarding against foreign espionage and interference

while a terrorist incident is highly visible, foreign espionage or intelligence activities are not as they are conducted clandestinely. countries engage in espionage or intelligence activities by recruiting human agents or using technical methods to obtain sensitive or confidential information about their target countries. some countries may also engage in interference activities to try to shape the actions, behavior and policies of the countries they are targeting to advance their own national interests.

foreign espionage, intelligence and influence operations that target singapore or make use of singaporeans to conduct such activities undermine singapore’s national interests. the disclosure of sensitive or classified information to singapore’s adversaries could potentially harm our national security, jeopardise our economic interests or damage our diplomatic relations. over the years, isd has uncovered numerous such activities and put a stop to them.

cyberspace – a new threat frontier



in today’s world, spy games are no longer confined to the physical domain. cyberspace has emerged as a new threat frontier when it comes to state-sponsored espionage and hostile intelligence activities.

isd’s counter-espionage and counter-intelligence work straddles both the physical and cyber domains. as a highly-digitalised society, singapore is particularly vulnerable to cyber threats. state-sponsored cyber intrusions against our government, critical infrastructure and other information networks pose substantial threats to singapore’s national security and national interests. similarly, hostile dis-, mis- and mal-information campaigns launched by other countries against singapore could seriously compromise our internal security and stability. they could be part of a larger subversive agenda by our foreign adversaries.

isd fuses our counter-intelligence expertise and cutting-edge technological capabilities to counter threats to singapore’s national security emanating from the cyber domain. we advise singapore government agencies on protective security measures to guard against threats, and work closely with relevant agencies to safeguard singapore’s national cyber security.

strengthening community partnerships

over the years, isd has built strong partnerships with the community, public agencies and private sector entities. we place high value on strengthening our ties with the wider community as we recognise that the public has an important role to play in helping to protect singapore and singaporeans from security threats.

isd heritage centre

the centre, which opened its doors in 2002, was originally conceptualised as an in-house training facility for isd officers. it contains a rich repository of material that documents an integral part of singapore's post-war and modern security history.

the centre showcases security operations undertaken by isd through the years, and reveals the painstaking intelligence work of its officers to keep singapore safe and sovereign. visitors learn about the fundamental role the organisation has played in neutralising threats from terrorists, spies, agents of influence, communists, and racial and religious extremists.

ultimately, in sharing singapore's security history, the centre seeks to emphasise that singapore's security and stability do not come naturally; they require hard work and sacrifice and should never be taken for granted.

visiting the heritage centre

as the heritage centre is located within a protected area, it is not open to walk-in visitors. instead, it liaises with organised groups such as government agencies, schools and grassroots organisations to facilitate requests for visits.

mobile exhibitions

in order to bring key security messages to a larger audience, the centre also organises mobile exhibitions at external locations. it collaborates, for example, with schools and tertiary institutions to hold exhibitions on the threats to singapore's national security posed by terrorism, communalism, extremism and radicalisation.

security outreach

isd regularly undertakes security outreach to sensitise members of the public to the various threats to singapore’s internal security. since 2001, we have conducted numerous briefings for various groups in the community, such as the youth, community leaders and migrant workers in singapore, to raise awareness of the terrorism threat and educate the public on how they can play a part in preventing terrorist incidents and the spread of extremist ideologies. we also conduct lectures, workshops and mobile exhibitions on national security issues for public sector agencies, institutes of higher learning, community organisations, and private sector companies.

settling-in programme for new foreign domestic workers (terrorism module)

community partnership in the engagement of migrant workers including migrant worker imamsattack, threats, bay, keeping, ji, members, singapore, security, threat, operations, terrorism, isd, singaporesa strict culture of secrecy was ingrained among ji members at the point of recruitment.
ji members used the codes in conjunction with a special recall code system, bmtdk, to alert members of upcoming meetings.
beyond radical islamist terrorism, the global rise of other forms of violent extremist movements including far-right extremism, has added to the terrorism threat singapore faces.
ultimately, in sharing singapore's security history, the centre seeks to emphasise that singapore's security and stability do not come naturally; they require hard work and sacrifice and should never be taken for granted.
security outreachisd regularly undertakes security outreach to sensitise members of the public to the various threats to singapore’s internal security.advertisement

earlier this month, singaporean authorities announced the arrest of a 38-year-old male singaporean teacher under the city-state’s internal security act (isa). the man was detained after allegedly making plans to travel to palestine to carry out armed violence.

the arrestee had reportedly been galvanized by the israel-palestine conflict for many years. he was ready to travel to the city of gaza in palestine under the guise of humanitarian aid to join the militant group hamas in its fight against israel. however, investigations thus far have revealed that he acted alone and there are no indications that he intended to carry out attacks in singapore.

this is not the first such case in singapore. in 2021, a 20-year-old singaporean national was detained under the isa for planning to carry out a knife attack against jews at a local synagogue. he had also made plans to travel to gaza to join hamas. both men were self-radicalized with a deep hatred for israel after being convinced that palestinians were being oppressed as a result of the israel-palestine conflict.

an imminent threat

diplomat brief weekly newsletter n get briefed on the story of the week, and developing stories to watch across the asia-pacific. get the newsletter

the singaporean authorities consider self-radicalization an imminent threat to the nation. the teacher was detained due to his deeply entrenched radical beliefs and support for armed violence. the country adopts a zero-tolerance approach to such threats and generally takes firm action against any individual in singapore who supports, promotes, undertakes, or prepares to undertake armed violence. this is regardless of how they rationalize such violence or where it takes place.

enjoying this article? click here to subscribe for full access. just $5 a month.

the singapore terrorism threat assessment report released by the ministry of home affairs last july states that the spread of radical ideologies online has increased the threat posed by self-radicalization in singapore. it reported that since 2015, 45 self-radicalized individuals, comprising 33 singaporeans and 12 foreigners, have been issued with orders of detention or restriction orders under the isa. thirteen of them – three singaporeans and 10 foreigners – have been convicted under the terrorism (suppression of financing) act for terrorism financing offenses.

the ongoing developments abroad, such as the israel-palestine conflict, the war in ukraine, and events in afghanistan and the middle east have the potential to affect the security landscape of singapore. they also have implications for the stability and cohesion of the city-state’s multi-religious and multi-racial society.

there is no doubt that extremist elements can exploit such conflicts and tap into grievances to promote their radical narratives and recruit supporters. as such, it is critical that singapore maintains a zero-tolerance approach to all forms of hate speech and extremist rhetoric.

advertisement

the need for vigilance

with self-radicalization posing an enduring threat to singapore, there is a dire need for singaporeans to be more vigilant about it. public vigilance and preparedness are key components of singapore’s defense against terrorism, for instance. although there is currently no specific intelligence of an imminent terrorist attack, singapore continues to appear as a target in terrorist propaganda. with the easing of covid-19 pandemic restrictions and the resumption of cross-border travel, terrorist elements may become more active and revisit plots that had been put on hold.

when it comes to extremist threats, however, singaporeans generally tend to be more complacent. for example, a survey conducted by the ministry of communications and information in 2021, indicated that the percentage of respondents who believed singapore was a target for terrorists had dropped by 7 percent from 2019 to 2020. in this regard, and commenting on the latest isa arrest, singapore’s home affairs minister k. shanmugam said that singaporean’s sense of threat is reducing when in fact the risk is increasing.

another reason singaporeans must stay vigilant is the fact that extremist ideologies are spreading widely online. even absent an immediate physical threat to singapore, the threat from islamist terrorist groups and their violent ideology persists. their virtual network of supporters continues to disseminate propaganda, raise funds, and plot attacks.

more importantly, extremists and hate preachers are exploiting the internet and social media platforms to influence young people. for example, the teacher who was recently arrested was deeply influenced by the teachings of radical foreign preachers such as zakir naik and ahmed deedat, disseminated through videos posted online. these videos discussed the concept of armed jihad in defense of islam, and further entrenched the teacher’s belief in the need to engage in armed defense of the palestinian people.

moving forward

the threat of ideological extremism from islamist groups and individuals has evolved over two decades since singapore discovered the jemaah islamiyah (ji) network operating within the country in 2001. at the time, ji was planning to attack several targets in singapore in the name of jihad.

enjoying this article? click here to subscribe for full access. just $5 a month.

in 2007, singapore identified its first case of self-radicalization when a young lawyer who was not part of ji was arrested under the isa. he was detained for absorbing his militant jihadi ideas directly from islamist websites on the internet. in 2011, several singaporeans were arrested for planning to travel to syria to join the armed conflict there, while since 2014, a couple of singaporeans were detained for supporting the islamic state of iraq and syria.

today, the dominant threat to singapore comes from self-radicalized individuals. internet, smartphones, and other technological advances, which have become key tools of extremist propaganda, continue to challenge singapore’s security and stability. social media platforms have also made it easier, faster and cheaper to disseminate extremists’ ideas and ideologies.

this month’s arrest was an important reminder that the threat of self-radicalization has not yet diminished. every citizen should be mindful that the threat endures and will remain for many years. hence, it requires constant attention and response from the government and community. the use or advocacy of violence, even with the intention of doing it outside of singapore for whatever reason, is completely unjustified.

advertisement

the israel-palestine conflict has dragged on for many decades. sentiments and feelings of unhappiness, anger, and sympathy for those oppressed by the conflict are legitimate and natural. however, it must be emphasized that violence is not the way to resolve the conflict and will only lead to greater problems. singaporeans are encouraged to aid those affected by the conflict through the proper channels, such as donating to humanitarian relief efforts and showing solidarity through peaceful means. there is also a need to help our community and individuals with ways to deal with and manage their anger, sentiments and grievances. the community must stand together to prevent the further self-radicalization of singaporeans.conflict, threat, singapore, isa, continuing, armed, extremist, violence, travel, selfradicalization, singaporeansthe teacher was detained due to his deeply entrenched radical beliefs and support for armed violence.
the singapore terrorism threat assessment report released by the ministry of home affairs last july states that the spread of radical ideologies online has increased the threat posed by self-radicalization in singapore.
advertisementthe need for vigilancewith self-radicalization posing an enduring threat to singapore, there is a dire need for singaporeans to be more vigilant about it.
even absent an immediate physical threat to singapore, the threat from islamist terrorist groups and their violent ideology persists.
this month’s arrest was an important reminder that the threat of self-radicalization has not yet diminished.synopsis

isis may have suffered battlefield reverses, but in some respects – not least ideologically – it is resilient. analysts, academics and security officials should resist the impulse to call time on the study of these types of issues – this mistake has been made before.

commentary

with the so-called islamic state in iraq and syria (isis) seemingly in eclipse, many senior security officials and terrorism analysts we have interacted with around the world are saying that they have now time to think, attend conferences, and see to other security issues that loom large these days.

case studies on lessons learnt can be compiled, loose ends (like the foreign fighter returnee issue) tackled and then, so the reasoning goes, we can all move on to other pressing concerns. we’ve actually been here before – sort of.

misreading the ground

it feels now like so long ago since may 2011, when the perpetrator of the 9-11 terrorist attacks on sept 11, 2001, osama bin laden, was killed by united states navy seals. the group he led, al-qaeda, appeared to have lost the capability to mount iconic 9-11 style operations, and was limited to localised attacks.

al-qaeda in iraq (aqi) was deemed by many to be a localised force with the threat it posed under control. aqi’s spawn, isis, did not yet exist. even when it appeared on the horizon in 2013, it was memorably – and wrongly – dismissed by us president barack obama as nothing more than an amateurish ‘jv’ (junior varsity) outfit.

just as the world did in 2011, we risk miscalculating again.

islamic state in the future

even as isis’ footprint shrinks in iraq and syria, it is making inroads to existing and emerging conflict zones including asia. extremists continue to travel to southeast asia to join isis-centric groups. as demonstrated by the marawi siege (may-november 2017), isis’ strategy of decentralisation works to destabilise southeast asia. governments will have to contend with the possibility of more marawis, and more mautes.

and then of course there are longer-term issues. tracking the fighters and family members (some young children born in syria or iraq) who return to their home countries will be important: for some the issue may be judicial process, for others, it may be aftercare or resocialisation, and efforts to prevent “re-radicalisation”.

this itself is an endeavour which will be generational and which will continue to reverberate long after the embers of conflict will appear to have died down. all concerned parties will have to stay the course – because the adversary will.

now what?

there is an urgent need to go beyond conventional metrics – how many joined isis, how many foreign fighter returnees, how many sympathisers arrested locally. an over-reliance on bean counting would serve to obscure evident truths: isis is transforming from a caliphate-building group to a global movement that, notwithstanding its battlefield reverses, has continued resilience ideologically.

in southeast asia, muslims as well as other faiths have for centuries been tolerant, syncretistic, and have valued coexistence. in the present era, sectarianism, exclusivist thought, and intolerance is on the rise. from the western edge of the rakhine to the eastern edge of mindanao, ethno-political, politico-religious ideologies, fanned by their ideologues, challenge the security landscape of the region.

none of this is the same as terrorism. but at the extreme edges of this mental and physical geography, ideologues provide the mood music to create the atmospherics for extreme thinking, and, in some cases, violence.

we must ensure that this is not isis’ legacy.

building partnerships

governments alone cannot cope with the threat today.

the key is for governments to build partnerships with the community organisations, private sector and academia to prevent the radicalisation of communities and build community resilience among its vulnerable segments.

three and a half years ago, the east asia summit on religious rehabilitation and social reintegration was convened by the s. rajaratnam school of international studies (rsis) and the singapore government, with the aim of sparking a conversation on developing a regional policy, plan and strategy by drawing both government and civil society partners.

things have moved since then – the attacks in surabaya and marawi come to mind – but not just in terms of incidents or attacks. trends in radicalisation are changing. as singapore officials have revealed, online self-radicalisation is taking place among young people at a quicker tempo, and at a younger age.

the religious rehabilitation group (rrg) has found particular difficulties in getting through to these newer, self-radicalised individuals, with the deradicalisation success rate standing at 25 per cent (as opposed to close to 90 per cent for radicalised individuals from groups like the jemaah islamiyah). there are plenty of theories as to why this is, but no definitive answer.

needed: a different type of analyst

the recently-concluded 2018 southeast asian track 1.5 symposium, organised as part of singapore’s asean chairmanship, was timely in taking stock of the evolution of the range of counter-terrorism efforts since the 2015 symposium, while laying the platform for greater counter-terrorism cooperation in the region.

key decision-makers and experts in the field from asean and the wider world were present. in recognition of how far the field has developed, present too were speakers and representatives from social media companies.

as experts at the symposium argued, upstream efforts to combat extremist thought need to start at the earliest possible stage. the counter narratives themselves will need to be appealing, and informed by variegated perspectives.

in fact, it may well be that in time, a different type of analyst will be needed to look at the problem, which is a continuum that spans violent extremism, to sectarianism, to intolerance, to social media filter bubbles. individuals versed in anthropology, sociology and ethnography will be crucial to complement orthodox perspectives. at present, we only have a few people who see the proverbial elephant in totality – most see only a part.

trends and evolutions

trends are changing in the wider world, too. radicalisation knows no colour. in the united kingdom, the home office has announced that the number of white suspected terrorists being arrested in the uk has overtaken those of asian appearance for the first time in more than a decade. this is in part due to the under-studied phenomenon of “reciprocal radicalisation”, which sees the far right and islamists feeding off each other in a negative spiral.

traditionally, in southeast asia, governments and security experts have discounted the possibility of such a phenomenon, partly on account of the absence of a defined far-right. but are we so sure there are no similar negative and self-reinforcing spirals here?

in 2011 there was a lot governments and security experts did not see. there were mental model of the way the world worked, and how the threat would evolve.

many experts were wrong then. if we are complacent, we risk being wrong again in our approach to present problems in appreciation of future threats. we should use this window of opportunity to prepare for isis’ evolutions, and for deep thinking about extremism itself. this may just be a lull in the next storm of violent extremism.

about the authors

rohan gunaratna is professor of security studies and head of international centre for political violence and terrorism research (icpvtr) at the s. rajaratnam school of international studies (rsis), nanyang technology university, singapore. shashi jayakumar is head of the centre of excellence for national security (cens) at rsis. an earlier version appeared in the straits times, 11 october 2018.southeast, radicalisation, asia, present, security, violent, studies, continuum, extremism, isis, world, experts, iraqextremists continue to travel to southeast asia to join isis-centric groups.
as demonstrated by the marawi siege (may-november 2017), isis’ strategy of decentralisation works to destabilise southeast asia.
in southeast asia, muslims as well as other faiths have for centuries been tolerant, syncretistic, and have valued coexistence.
in 2011 there was a lot governments and security experts did not see.
this may just be a lull in the next storm of violent extremism.singapore (reuters) - armed officers patrol a train station where television screens and giant posters warn of the threat from militants. nearby, fake gunmen storm a shopping mall in one of many recent terror attack simulations.

police take part in a simulated gunmen attack demonstration for the public at a housing estate in singapore december 10, 2017. picture taken december 10, 2017 reuters/edgar su

but this is not some war-ravaged country. it is one of the safest in the world, singapore.

the wealthy island-state has a near-perfect record of keeping its shores free from terror, but as it prepares to host defence ministers from around southeast asia this week, it appears to have good reason to have prioritized stopping the spread of militancy in the region.

the cosmopolitan financial hub, which was second only to tokyo in the economist intelligence unit’s safe cities index in 2017, says it has been the target of militant plots for years, some stemming from its muslim-majority neighbors, and that it’s a matter of ‘when’ and not ‘if’ militants will strike.

“singapore continues to face a serious security threat from both homegrown radicalised individuals and foreign terrorists who continue to see singapore as a prized target,” singapore’s ministry of home affairs (mha) said in response to e-mailed questions from reuters.

singapore authorities say they have been a target of islamic extremism since the 1990s, but efforts to deter terrorism have stepped up markedly in recent years with more frequent attacks on western countries and after islamic state (is) militants briefly took over a town in the southern philippines last year.

raising further concerns about the threat to the island, a singaporean soldier has featured on a number of islamic state promotional videos, most recently in december where he was filmed executing men alongside other militants.

in its inaugural terrorism threat assessment report released last year, the mha said islamic state has demonstrated that singapore is “very much on its radar” and that the threat to the country remains “the highest in recent years” - claims that are backed up by security experts.

“singapore, being known as safe and secure, makes it such a risk target,” said dan bould, asia director of crisis management at professional services firm aon and a former captain in the british army.

slideshow ( 6 images )

“if there’s an attack in the philippines, it may get half an hour in a 24-hour news cycle. an attack in singapore with all the multicultural individuals operating here, will be within the narrative for a few days at least.”

in early 2017, aon lifted singapore in the terrorism and political violence category of its annual risk map from negligible to low risk.

mobile app

the reality is that singapore has so far escaped the attacks seen in other major world cities like new york, london and berlin in recent years. that’s why it is at the bottom of the 2017 global terror index, with no reported terror-related attacks post 9/11.

but three in four singaporeans believe that it’s only a matter of time before the country experiences a terror attack, a poll by the local newspaper sunday times last year showed.

singapore authorities certainly do not want their citizens to be complacent. everyone, including school children, is encouraged to download a mobile app that alerts them to emergency situations and allows them to send in videos and photos of suspicious events.

the mha said that as of the end of last year, more than 1.3 million devices were equipped with the sgsecure app, a large chunk of the population of around 5.6 million.

simulations of terror attacks - including one just over a week ago where masked gunman stormed a children’s activity center on the resort island of sentosa - are regular. last month, singapore’s military undertook its biggest mobilization exercise in more than three decades, including an inter-agency response to the simulation of a gunman at its national stadium.

authorities said last year there was reliable information that is militants were considering carrying out an attack in singapore in the first half of 2016, a threat which they said was countered.

in august 2016, neighboring indonesia, which has the world’s largest muslim population, arrested six suspects with links to is who were accused of plotting rocket attacks on singapore’s iconic marina bay sands hotel.

malaysia, singapore’s northern neighbor which also has a muslim-majority, and indonesia say thousands of their citizens sympathize with is and hundreds are believed to have traveled to syria to join the group. regional security officials say many are returning home after reverses in the middle east.

hardline approach

singapore takes a hardline approach to suspected radicals and bilveer singh, an adjunct senior fellow at the rajaratnam school of international studies, says it is one of the reasons behind its success so far.

the most controversial measure at its disposal is its colonial-era internal security act which allows for suspects to be held for lengthy periods without trial.

the mha said it currently has 20 people detained under the act for “terrorism-related” activities, and since 2002 has held close to 90 for such activities.

“isa is a fantastic deterrent, and so far it has worked,” singh said.

authorities have also deported scores of foreigners for suspected radicalism in recent years, and in october banned two popular muslim preachers from zimbabwe and malaysia from entering the city-state, saying their views bred intolerance and were a risk to its social harmony.attack, 2017, target, terror, singapore, threat, security, attacks, militant, recent, singapores, prepares, worriessingapore (reuters) - armed officers patrol a train station where television screens and giant posters warn of the threat from militants.
nearby, fake gunmen storm a shopping mall in one of many recent terror attack simulations.
police take part in a simulated gunmen attack demonstration for the public at a housing estate in singapore december 10, 2017.
but three in four singaporeans believe that it’s only a matter of time before the country experiences a terror attack, a poll by the local newspaper sunday times last year showed.
simulations of terror attacks - including one just over a week ago where masked gunman stormed a children’s activity center on the resort island of sentosa - are regular.